VOID ORDERS
By
Ch. Manzoor
Hussain,
Advocate,
Rawalpindi
1. The concept
of void order has engaged the attention of Superior Forums in this Country on
more than one occasion. Lengthy and conclusive pronouncements have been declared
which adorn the pages of law reports. These legendary verdicts are guide for
the scholars and jurists alike. It is imperative to find out the definition of
a "Void Order" before tracing its historical perspective in the
course of its growth in our jurisdiction.
2. In accordance
with "Law Terms and Phrases" by Sardar Muhammad Iqbal Mokal, the word
"void" is used when total lack of existence is intended to be
conveyed. In the strictest sense, it means absolutely null, that is to say
incapable of ratification. In "Warton's Law Lexicon", it is defined
as an instrument of transaction nugatory to an extent that nothing can cure it.
"A concise law Dictionary" puts it as of no legal effect; a nullity.
The survey of all definitions manifestly show that a void order is one which
has no legal footing to stand upon it.
3. "The
first in the long line of pronouncements on this question by the Supreme Court
of Pakistan is to be found in Yousaf Ali v. Muhammad Aslam Zia PLD 1958 SC
(Pak.) 104. The Court held in this case that a void order was an order passed
by an authority which did not have the jurisdiction to pass it and the
jurisdiction was defined as power of the Authority concerned to pass the
impugned order. Thus, an order passed by an Authority in excess of its powers
was void and non‑existent". The result of such orders ~ is nullity
and the superstructure raised on its foundation stands automatically
demolished. The mala fide orders and those without hearing and wanting
opportunity of show‑cause notice, fall in this category.
4. In Jamal Shah
v. Election Commission (PLD 1966 SC 1), distinction between the orders of
Regular Courts and Tribunals was made. The orders of regular Courts could be
illegal without being void, whereas in the case of Tribunals, the orders, if
illegal, were held to be void and similarly, the orders emanating from
proceedings where the application of mind was lacking, were also held to be
void. In Swaleh v. United Grain Fodder Agencies PLD 1964 SC 79 it was suggested
that the consequences of void orders have to be ignored, irrespective of the
hardship to the innocent strangers. "It should be remembered that if an
order be a nullity then every Court before whom it is brought is not only
entitled but bound to ignore it".
5. The Supreme
Court has not followed the observations made in Swaleh's case in its subsequent
decisions. Ghulam Mohyuddin v. Settlement Commissioner PLD 1964 SC 829, Ch.
Altaf Hussain v. Chief Settlement Commissioner PLD 1965 SC 68 and Ghulam Fatima
v. Muhammad Hussain and others PLD 1976 SC 729, are instances which can be
cited to support this point. "It may be that though an order is without
jurisdiction and a nullity, yet (a) it is not challenged by the person entitled
to challenge it, (b) it is not challenged within the time allowed by law, or
(c) the Court in its discretion refused to declare it a nullity. The question
is what becomes of such an order? Is it to be treated as valid? As regards an
order capable of producing legal consequences which is not challenged by the aggrieved
party, it will, it appears remain operative as any other order". A
judgment is incorrect if it is wrong in law or fact; it is void if it is
pronounced by incompetent Tribunal (PLD 1960 SC 237).
6. "A void
act must be distinguished from an illegal or irregular act. As seen above, a
void act is an act without jurisdiction and is a nullity; an illegal or
irregular act, on the other hand, is an act within jurisdiction and is not
void". Again, an illegal act and an irregular act have also made distinction
inasmuch as the later can be cured, whereas the former does not possess such a
character. Therefore, illegalities and irregularities cannot be treated alike.
7. The status,
effect and scope of void order was discussed by the Supreme Court of Pakistan
at full length in Province of Punjab v. Muhammad Zafar Bukhari PLD 1997 SC 351.
The apex Court having surveyed the case‑law on the point, held that a
void order is not always to be struck down regardless of the consequences of
such a decision, but that a void order must be struck down provided there is no
statute or principle of law which would make it unjust or inequitable to strike
it down. This qualification is very important and that is why, for example, a
writ may be refused as against a void order if this would enable the
petitioner, to circumvent the provisions of a statute or limitation. There is
also ample authority on the proposition that a petitioner is estopped to
challenge the void order from his conduct or on account of laches.
8. However, as
pointed out by Mr. Justice (Retired) Dorab Patel, in his article, "The
Concept of Void Orders in Our Jurisdiction", all in cases affecting the
liberty of the subject, an order passed without hearing the person concerned
must be set aside unless the statute has taken away such a right. Secondly, the
rule of natural justice must always be followed when the provision in this
respect is contained in the Constitution. Following the view in 'Ridge v.
Boldwin' the learned Judge suggested that the consequences of void order may be
re‑examined in the context of this judgment in the interest of harmony of
law. The meanings of "Jurisdiction" of Courts, it was pointed out,
was also enlarged by the eminent judges for good reasons and for better
administration of justice. Finally, it was proposed that rights of third
innocent parties with regard to the void orders may also be decided by the
superior Courts.
9. The growth of
law continues with the evolution and change in the Society coupled with socio‑economic
needs. It is a natural phenomenon. The march of time goes on leaving its
contours. The development of law shapes itself for the order of Society. The
superior forms interpret the law for the proper administration of justice. The
nature of 'Void Orders or its effects would continue to receive the attention
of superior forums for the betterment of society backed by the sagacity and
wisdom of jurists.