

C.B.R'S. DISTRUST
TOWARDS ALL

 

By

 

Dr. Ikramul Haq,
Advocate, Lahore

 

Central Board of Revenue
(C.B.R.), the apex body responsible for tax collection and administration at
federal level, is showing mistrust, suspicion and dissatisfaction towards all:
taxpayers, assessing officers, tax professionals, Courts, Federal Tax Ombudsman and now even the Federal
Secretary of Law.

 

Tax bureaucrats sitting in C.B.R.
are suffering from syndrome of self-righteousness. They believe whatever they
do is perfectly just and according to law and all taxpayers in connivance with
Assessing Officers and tax professionals are making their policies fail. They
are highly critical of recent bold, well-founded and remarkable rulings of
Federal Tax Ombudsman [of course in private meetings while appreciating his
role publically] that have utterly exposed their maladministration and
highhandedness. Their disrespect toward higher Courts is well‑documented
as on more than one occasions, the Courts have passed strictures against the
C.B.R. and tax officials for flouting their decisions and showing no respect
for due process of law. Recently in a most undesirable manner, the C.B.R. has
expressed its dissatisfaction with certain decisions taken by the Federal Law
Secretary [Dawn, 15th
 November, 2002].

 

According to the report, the
C.B.R. has told the Government in certain disputed tax issues with
Government-owned corporations unfavourable rulings given by the Law Secretary
are not acceptable to it. The story published in the English newspaper reveals:
"the Government has asked the Attorney-General of Pakistan to settle all outstanding
tax disputes 'involving billions of rupees between Government organizations and
the Central Board of Revenue (C.B.R.)". The Government has made it clear
that the decision and advice given by the Attorney General would be binding on
both sides. The Income-tax Authorities had been pursuing tax liability cases
against the Government owned organizations like TCP, Karachi Shipyard and
Engineering Works (KS&EW), Karachi Dock Labour Board; Federal Bank for
Cooperatives and Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan for the last so many
years. Whenever assessment starts and tax demands are raised the Government
owned organizations dispute the assessment. When the income tax department
pursues recovery of tax, these organizations start agitating the matter through
their respective ministries.

 

"However,
for early resolution of tax disputes the Government in the year 1998 directed
all the organizations through their ministries to withdraw all Court cases
against the C.B.R. and tax departments. The government objective was to settle
such disputes outside the Courts through inter-ministerial consultation. And
those unresolved matters of such cases were referred to the Ministry of Law,
Justice and Human Rights. But to utter dismay of the C.B.R. in most cases, the
Law Secretary gave decision against the Income-tax Department on points of law
and in some of the decisions it contravened the verdict of the superior Courts
on similar issues", the report said.

 

The report is certainly spoon-fed
by the C.B.R. as its `utter dismay" on orders passed by Law Secretary is a
subjective conclusion.

 

The report has been published
without knowing and investigating the actual legal position involved and
without appreciating the facts and circumstances of each and every case. The
Federal Law Secretary, a Judge of High Court, has served the Government as
Deputy Attorney-General for a long time before being elevated as Judge of High
Court. He has been arguing tax cases on behalf of the C.B.R. in a most
impressive manner (though C.B.R. now is totally dissatisfied with his
performance as unfavourable ruling have been pronounced against it) and has
knowledge, experience and legal acumen to adjudicate intricate tax issues.

 

C.B.R., according to the
newspapers' report, after showing its "utter dismay" with the
decisions of the Federal Law Secretary approached the Federal Government
"for setting aside the decision of secretary law because apart from
causing loss in revenue his decisions were also having a negative impact on
non-public cases". After taking stock of the situation the Cabinet decided
to 'refer all those cases which were decided by law secretary but are not
acceptable to the C.B.R. to the Attorney-General of Pakistan for his advice and
decision. The cause of dispute between tax authorities and Government owned
organization, besides many other points, is mainly over the "subsidy"
given by the Government to these organizations to salvage them from financial
crisis. The Income-tax Department treats such a subsidy given by the Government
to these organizations on suffering losses as their income which is taxable but
Government owned organizations are disputing the same and they say
"subsidy" is not a revenue receipt but a contribution by the
Government towards their capital.

 

The C.B.R. itself accepted the
arbitration of Federal Law Secretary and now it is refusing to accept the
decision of the arbitrator. It is surely a bizarre situation. It is totally
unprecedented in any civilized society. It shows how much respect the C.B.R.
has for due process of law. The worthy Law Secretary as a Judge of Lahore High
Court passed a historic order in which he struck down the selection of cases by
the C.B.R. for total audit on parametric basis rather than on random basis as
promised in the Self-Assessment Scheme. The highhandedness of the C.B.R. and
its insistence to be allowed to proceed with illegal process was taken due note
of by the Honourable Judge in a most appropriate manner by passing the
following observations in Messrs Akhlaque Cloth House Faisalabad v. Assistant
Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle 12, Faisalabad Zone, Faisalabad and three
others 2001 PTD 3121:

 

"..:Admittedly
respondent while promulgating self-assessment scheme for the year 2000-2001
made a clear representation that cases for selection of audit would be made
through random computer ballot. This was the promise given out by the Government
to the taxpayer and the citizens. It has a binding effect in law and
jurisprudence. It is commended by the God Al-Mighty through the passages
contained in Qur'an-e-Hakeem in Surah Baqara, Surah Al Maida and Surah Bani Israel that the 'promises
made to each other should be adhered to. This solemn transcendental principle
is to be followed and is not merely decorative. The promise becomes more
imperative when it is given out by the Government. Therefore, such promise has
a binding force and cannot be allowed to be breeched more so by the hierarchy
of respondent No. 4. The device or parametric computer balloting, therefore,
has no place in the self-assessment scheme under consideration and it is alien
to the scheme. It, therefore, follows that the parametric computer balloting is
contrary to the law under the said scheme and has to be declared as such."

 

In another case the learned Judge
made similar remarks when the C.B:R. in violation of its own scheme selected a
case for total audit though a promise of immunity from such selection was
given. While deciding the petition in Millat Bottle Store Faisalabad v. C.B.R. and
others (1998) 78 Tax 173 (HC Lah.) it was observed:

 

"...The
theory of vested right as well as promissory estoppel has been applied by the
Courts of this country since long. It is unnecessary to burden this judgment by
mention of all cases as reference to Army Welfare Sugar Mills Ltd. etc. v
Federation of. Pakistan
and others 1992 SCMR 1652 and Al-Samrez Enterprises v. The Federation of
Pakistan and others 1966 SCMR 1917 would suffice.

 

Another aspect
of the matter which is to be noted is that under Islamic dispensation of
justice, the parties including State should be bound down to the terms of the
contract arrived at between them and they must be made to adhere to their
promises. In view of Article 2A of the Constitution and promulgation of Shariat
(Application) Ordinance, 1990, Islamic principles of interpretation or statutes
are to be kept in view by the Court. It follows, therefore, that the
respondents cannot be wriggled out of the clear promises which they made while
promulgating self‑assessment scheme for the year 1993-94."

 

The issue in conflict between
C.B.R. and Government owned organisations is taxation of grant-in-aid or
subsidy given to them by the State to meet their losses or other capital investment
needs. It is a tragic situation that two wings of the Government are
quarrelling over something which is totally futile. It is just a matter of
taking out money from one pocket of the Government (Government organistaions)
and putting into another (C.B.R.). The purpose is obviously to show higher
collection figures to impress the IMF by fleecing government bodies and then
giving the same back to them in the form of subsidies. This is the whole drama
that the Government is engaged in keeping the public in the dark and trying to
hoodwink the international donors.

 

As regards taxation of
grant-in-aid or any similar receipt, it cannot be treated as income of a person
by any established principles of law. There is no dearth of case law on this point that such amounts are capital
receipts 2001 PTD 2282, 1987 PTD 482, 1991 PTD 991 and 2000 PTD 823. Although
from the Press report, the exact nature of the subsidy is not clear (as in some
cases it can be treated as revenue receipt) but it appears that the C.B.R. has
a weaker case as compared to Government owned corporations. Obviously the
C.B.R. is irked by revenue implication of the decision of the Federal Law
Secretary and is not at all interested in understanding with an open mind the
legal point involved. In recent years it has become easier for the C.B.R. to
milk the Government owned corporations, banks and other financial institutions,
which are easy prey for undue tax collections, rather than going for the
tougher ones who are habitual, hard-core tax evaders having strong political
clout. C.B.R's. stalwarts run from pillar to post to secure lucrative positions
and have, therefore, neither will nor capacity to net these tax dodgers.

 

The problem of the C.B.R., it
seems is unfavourable decisions and not the office of Law Secretary. It has
become a regular practice on the part of C.B.R. that it rejects anything that
is unfavourable. It has become allergic to criticism. It wants that everybody
should unconditionally endorse all its decisions and policies no matter how
illogical, harsh and unreasonable they may be. The C.B.R. wants that nobody
should come in its way, and a free hand should be given to it to collect taxes
by hook or by crook. This attitude of highhandedness on the part of C.B.R. has
discredited the entire tax system where no one is ready to pay taxes as a
matter of duty.

 

The image of C.B.R. that has
emerged over the time is that of a ruthless tax collecting machinery having no regard for taxpayers' rights. One wonders
what will happen if the learned Attorney-General also gives a decision in
favour of the Government owned corporations. Perhaps then the C.B.R. will write
to IMF to intervene, as the Pakistan Government has become an impediment in its
way for collection of taxes! Or it may lodge a complaint with George W. Bush
against its own people as its attitude appears more loyal to its foreign
masters than Pakistani taxpayers from whose money its salary is derived.

 

 

