CLOG ON DISCRETION
By
 M. Qasim Khan Khattak, Advocate,
Karak, (N.‑W.F.P.)
Discretion' makes its own place
not necessarily in a given situation, is always obedient to a special statute
or in other words a special statutory law can bar or act as clog on the
judicial exercise of discretion is to be based on equity good conscience and
are inherent to a common man of the society demands as well on the same path.
The same is the case with general law but subject to exceptions.
Taking example of section 54‑C
of Electricity Act, 1910, an Act got much familiarity in the present reign, is
in discriminate application. The consumers have been put by it to the wholesale
and blind exercise of discretion of sending huge amount, of bills assessed by
the concerned WAPDA Authorities on their sweet‑will not in consonance of
the Act or Rules framed thereunder. Lawyers and Advocates know cases of double
jeopardy or in contravention of section 24 of the Act and it is the point in
question between these two instances will be consequently elucidated with the
help of another example. Once a consumer is charged for electricity theft or
use of method prohibited by the law is debited with assessment units or charges
for a particular period, normally six months and called stealing charges. The
mode of which assessment has been prescribed in section 26‑A of the Act
does not allow to charge the same consumer again within the said period already
charged for, otherwise the case becomes of double jeopardy. If such a case
comes before our Courts from top to bottom denies the interim relief unless the
condition of deposit on protest has been made by the plaintiff in accordance
with the order of the Courts have so far showed inability to handle with the so‑called
bar‑in‑section 54‑C contains that if a notice under the Act
had been served on the consumer or his supply has been disconnected the Court
shall not issue interim prohibitory or mandatory injunction unless the impugned
amount has been deposited in accordance with the order. According to section 24
requirement of such notice is sine qua non if the consumer has not been
assessed for stealing charges. In simple words if a consumer is charged for
stealing charges cannot claim protection of section 24 of the Act equalises to
the former example. 
'Now if a poor person of domestic
consumption up to a one kilowatt is sent with a bill of unreasonable amount for
instance of Rs.1,00,000 for six months and he is charged again for the same
amount in the next month will face the situation of disconnection of supply at
least as according to our Courts, the bar contained in section 54‑C does
not allow the Courts to issue injunction. Even if this situation with incidence
of unreasonable amount or in case of double jeopardy are crystal clear before
the Court and away from the exercise of forced discretion albeit the maxim ubi
jus ibi remedium‑cum- injuria sin damnum are in thorough judicial
application if not resorted to in the set examples would mean let the State to
loot and there becomes the state of the law of jungle. Rule of prudence,
natural justice or reason demands its application to remove hardships or
inconvenience being caused or threatened to be caused by elements of injustice
or unlawful bearings. Derogation from the law is never allowed by our Courts
are Constitutional can touch vires of legislation.
Albeit section 54‑C of the
Act prima facie contains a bar has taken the name of clog on discretion,
nevertheless, can be removed in a fit case of unreasonableness or of double‑jeopardy
with a prayer to amend every law in modern form. If the injunctive situation
comes before a subordinate Court can remove the clog by deriving its inherent
powers but the best would be for our higher Courts to eliminate the clog on
discretion to remedy the blind adherence to section 54‑C of the Act.