OATH NEEDS TO BE MODIFIED
By
Ch. Muhammad
Bashir, Advocate, Faisalabad
Under section 7 of
the Oaths Act, 1873; all oaths and affirmations made under section 5 are
required to be administered in such form as the High Court may from time to
time prescribe.
Section 5, inter
alia, provides that oath or affirmation shall be made by‑‑
(a) all witnesses o may lawfully be examined
or give or be required to give evidence by or before any Court or person having
by law or consent of parties authority to examine such person or to receive
evidence.
(b) ... ... ...
.. ... ... 
(c) ... ... ... ... ...
... 
Section 6, as amended on 8‑7‑1981 by Federal (Revision and
Declaration) Ordinance (XXVIII of 1981) provides:
"When the
witness is a Muslim, he shall make an oath" The Lahore High Court, in
exercise of its power under section 7 has prescribed the following oath for
Muslim witnesses.
"I swear by
Allah Almighty that the evidence I shall give before the Court in this case
shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but truth, that I shall conceal
nothing from the Court and that if I say anything which is untrue or conceal
anything, the wrath of Allah may fall on me."
It has been
given out that the said oath has been amended so as to substitute the words
"the wrath of Allah may fall on me" with "Allah may be
displeased with me" but I have not been able 'to lay hand on the said
amendment. Even if it be so still the invocation of displeasure of Allah is no
less than wrath, in consequence, as we deprive ourselves from mercy and
forgiveness of Allah.
Previous to the
said oath the witnesses including the Muslims, were administered affirmation
which is reproduced hereunder: ‑‑
"I solemnly
affirm in the presence of Almighty God that the evidence which I shall give to
the Court in the case shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth."
Section 14 provides as under:‑‑
"Every
person giving evidence on any subject before any Court or person hereby
authorised to administer oath and affirmation shall be bound to state the truth
on such subject. "
Section 13 provided as under:‑‑ 
"No omission
to take any oath or make any affirmation no substitution of anyone for any
other of them and no irregularity whatever in the form m which anyone of ahem
is administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or render inadmissible any
evidence whatever in or in respect of which such omission, substitution or
irregularity took place or shall affect the obligation of a witness to state
the truth.
In a set of
precedents it has been held that there is no option for a Muslim witness but to
take oath as prescribed by High Court and non‑compliance therewith
vitiates the trial.
A few of the
cases representing the said view arc detailed below:
(i) 1988 PCr.LJ
2347,
(ii) 1991 MLD
48.
In another set of
precedents while giving effect to section 13, it has been held that omission to
administer oath and recording evidence on solemn affirmation is merely an
irregularity which does not affect the validity of proceeding or evidence.
A few of the
cases representing the said view are given below:
(1) 1991 PCR, LJ
568.
(ii) 1992 SCMR
408.
(iii) PLJ 1998
Lah. 1525.
(iv) 1999 SCMR
845.
(v) PLD 2001
Lah. 499.
The object of
recording evidence of a witness on solemn affirmation or oath is to make the
witness conscious of his obligation to state the truth.
In Islam it is
the obligation of a Muslim to tell the truth in all circumstances whether under
oath or not. The relevant verses are reproduced hereunder in English.
(i) Al
Baoarah, Verse 284:
"And hide
not testimony; and whoever hides it, his heart is certainly sinful."
(ii) Al
Baearah, Verse 43: 
"Do not mix
truth with falsehood and do not hide truth."
(iii) Al‑Nahl,
Verse 45:
"And make not
your oaths a means of deceit between you or your foot will slip after it has
been firmly established and you will taste evil because by acting, thus you
turned people away from the path of Allah and you will have a severe
punishment."
(iv) Al
Qalam, Verse 9:
"So comply
not with the wishes of those who reject the truth."
(v) Al Qalam,
Verse 11:
"Yield thou
not to any mean swearer.*